## What is Django

[wikipedia.org/wiki/Django\_(web_framework)](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Django_(web_framework)>):

[[Read latest](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Django_(web_framework)>)]

> Django is a free and open-source, Python-based web framework that runs on a web server. It follows the model–template–views (MTV) architectural pattern. It is maintained by the Django Software Foundation (DSF), an independent organization established in the US as a 501(c)(3) non-profit.
>
> Django's primary goal is to ease the creation of complex, database-driven websites. The framework emphasizes reusability and "pluggability" of components, less code, low coupling, rapid development, and the principle of don't repeat yourself. Python is used throughout, even for settings, files, and data models. Django also provides an optional administrative create, read, update and delete interface that is generated dynamically through introspection and configured via admin models.
>
> Some well-known sites that use Django include Instagram, Mozilla, Disqus, Bitbucket, Nextdoor, and Clubhouse.

Also, read: [wikipedia.org/wiki/Django\_(web_framework)#Features](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Django_(web_framework)#Features>)

<br>

Official Docs: [docs.djangoproject.com](https://docs.djangoproject.com)

Overview / At a glance: [docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.2/intro/overview](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.2/intro/overview)

## How the Web Works

Web applications have a frontend (client-side, what you see) and a backend (server-side, data processing). Communication happens via HTTP requests and responses.

### Rendering Web Pages:

There are two ways to render pages:

1. **Server-side rendering**: Server generates full HTML pages.
2. **Client-side rendering**: Server sends only data (e.g., JSON); client uses tools like **React, Angular, or Vue** to build pages.

Client-side rendering is now more common due to better scalability.

**[Important](#important):**

> **We don't use templates in Django that often now. Django is primarily used to build APIs. (DRF)**

## Setting Up the Development Environment

- Python

- VS Code
  - [Python](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.python) Extension

## Creating Your First Django Project

### Virtual Environment:

Install pipenv:

```bash
pip install pipenv
```

Now, inside the dir where you want to use the venv, run:

```bash
pipenv install django
```

This creates a venv dir at a location like:

```
/Users/samyak/.local/share/virtualenvs/Ultimate_Django-xxxxxxxx
```

All the libraries are installed there.

A `Pipfile` is also created, which looks like a `requirements.txt` file, but `pipenv` automatically adds the packages you install (using `pipenv install`) to this file.

<br>

To activate the venv:

```bash
pipenv shell
```

The terminal would now look like:

```
(Ultimate Django) samyak@Mac Ultimate Django %
```

i.e., the directory name appears as a prefix before `samyak@Mac`.

### `startproject`

```bash
django-admin startproject <projectname> <directoryname>
```

`directoryname` is optional, removing it would create the project inside a new directory with the same name as project.

Moving forward, we'll use `python manage.py` instead of `django-admin`, which is a wrapper around `django-admin`, which know about our project settings `settings.py`.

### `runserver`

(We can optionally specify the port number if some other app is running on the default port 8000.)

```bash
python manage.py runserver 9000
```

## Using the Integrated Terminal in VSCode

1. Open the project dir in VS.

2. Set the python interpreter path.

   To get the path of the current venv:

   ```bash
   pipenv --venv
   ```

3. Now, whenever you'd open terminal in this VS code project, venv would automatically be activated by VS.

   Again, remember project dir name should be added as prefix.

### Troubleshooting

If venv is not being activated automatically by VS, it could be because of [Python Environments](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.vscode-python-envs) extension, **uninstall it**.

## Creating Your First App

See `INSTALLED_APPS` in `settings.py`.

- `apps.py` – Should've been named `app_config.py` instead, since it contains the app's configuration.
- `views.py` – Again, the name is misleading. It's actually a request handler. "Views" usually refer to templates or HTML in web development.
  "Views" in other frameworks = "Templates" in Django.

## Writing Views

Views or view functions take a request and return a response. So, it's a **request handler** actually.

We can render a template and return the HTML using:

```py
from django.shortcuts import render
```

Just in any rare case, we can also return HTML directly:

```py
from django.http import HttpResponse
```

## Mapping URLs to Views

Read docs.

## Using Templates

We can replace Django's default template engine with a preferred template engine if we want.

### Important

**We don't use templates in Django that often now. Django is primarily used to build APIs. (DRF)**

## Debugging Django Applications in VSCode

Similar to normal Python debugger.

## Using Django Debug Toolbar

https://django-debug-toolbar.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html

Install with:

```bash
pipenv install django-debug-toolbar
```
